institutions (36%) lack awareness about the initiative. In similar line, the experience among the federal institutions in engaging stakeholders in budget process is limited, where  only a quarter of the institutions conducted discussion with key stakeholders and citizens. While it is encouraging  to  observe  72%  of  federal  institutions  providing  budget  and  expenditure information  to  their  stakeholders,  the  majority  of  the  visited  institutions  did  not  provide information  on  the  procurement  process  and  audit  findings.  Consequently,  the  needs  and priorities of citizens and stakeholders might not be adequately captured by the federal work plans. This might be related to challenges associated with a lack of clear understanding as to whom stakeholders are, low priority to FTA activities, and lack of awareness of FTA among a considerable number of institutions.

Inconsistency is observed among the federal institutions with regards to assigning responsible personnel to undertake the activities of the initiative - some assigning dedicated staff, others managing by teams and committees, and some others through temporary employment. Such discrepancy among the federal institutions might be a clear indication about lack of guidance as to how to operationalize the initiative in terms of personnel allocation. As it stands now, it warrants taking and selecting best practices and working towards to institutionalization of the practices.

## EFFECTIVENESS AND IMPACT OF FTA INITIATIVE

The  assessment  revealed  that  70%  of  the  sampled  households  are  aware  of  some  of  the activities/steps  involved  in  the  budgeting  process  in  their  locality.  At  the  regional/city administration level, the proportion of respondents that understand the budget process ranges from 77% in Addis Ababa to 58% in Afar. The number of people who understand the local budgeting processes has grown more than seven-fold: growing from 9 percent in 2009 to 70 percent in 2022. The qualitative assessment also confirmed the improvement in understanding level.

Access to budgetary information is also improving. Compared to the situation in 2009, the performance significantly improved (62% as compared to 9%). With regards to BLT, more than  half  of  the  respondents  (52%)  reported  that  they  have  participated  in  budget  literacy training  which is  an improvement compared to the situation in 2016 (52% as compared to 47%).  Qualitative  data  indicates  that  the  training  enabled  the  community  to  understand  the budget process better, know who is responsible for the budget preparations, and the responsibility

of  the  officials.  The  community  also  recognize  the  effectiveness  of  the  in  enabling  them  to interpret the budget information better.

Providing  easy-to-understand  information  allow  the  citizens  to  know  how  to  actively participate and ask the right questions and ask how the budget is spent which all contribute to improving  the  transparency  of  the  local  government  and  strengthening  the  accountability mechanism.

With regards to participating in the local government, the results indicate that an increasing number of people are meeting with their representatives and government officials. Looking at the progress over time (2009-2022), the number of people who meet with local government representatives has grown more than five-fold: from 9 percent in 2009 to 50 percent in 2022.

More than half (56%) of the respondents reported that they have participated in the budget planning. The result is encouraging given the unprecedented shocks the country faced during the last years, not the least of which is the Covid-19 pandemic and the resulting restriction which  significantly  limits  citizens'  movement  and  their  engagement.  The  qualitative  data revealed  that  the  community  participated  in  the  identification  of  the  community's  needs, supplied labor and other in-kind input during implementation, and provided feedback to their local government. While their involvement was limited, citizens did monitor the progress of projects while they were being implemented, take part in performance review meetings, and give their approval to the completed work before the delivery of the final payment.

Citizens  are  communicating  their  opinions  and  ideas  to  their  local  government  in  greater numbers. The percentage of citizens who express their opinions in 2022 has increased more than seven-fold since the baseline year -47% in 2022 as compared to 6% in 2009.

The  evaluation  also  showed  that  the  number  of  people  who  believe  their  thoughts  and opinions have little influence on the decisions made by their local government appears to be declining since 2009 (the baseline), indicating is that their local government is paying closer attention to the wants and opinions of its constituents.

Accessibility of the grievance redressing mechanism is improving. Compared to the situation during the previous assessment, an increasing number of people are filing their grievances­ (46% in 2022 as compared to 37% in 2016).

Encouragingly, there has been an upward trend in both quality of life and general satisfaction with  the  delivery  of  essential  services  (education,  health,  agriculture,  and  water)  over  the course of PBS II, III, and ESPES.

## CROSS CUTTING ISSUES

Determinant  of  transparency: The significant factors that affect the level of local governments' transparency are found to be the proportion of the households whose members are  self-employed,  average  household  annual  income,  the  proportion  of  females  in  the household with a leadership position, proportion of the literate population in the household, frequency of contact with local officials, distance to the nearest court and professionalism of local  government  employees.  The  higher  score  of  these  variables  enhanced  the  level  of transparency among the local governments and this result is consistent with common sense and the literature.

Gender : The availability of gender-disaggregated data, which facilitates the identification of challenges that hinder gender equality with respect to FTA implementation, is encouragingly being reported by three-quarters of the visited woredas. However, the experience of assessing the  performance  of  basic  services  and  monitoring  FTA  implementation  in  light  of  gendersegregated data is reported in less than half of the visited woredas. The results also indicate that the local government's effort to care about women's needs and their participation in the respective governments has been improving over the years.

Linkage and coordination: FTA is  one  of  the  citizen  engagement  sub-components  of  the ESPES program, and thus there has been an effort to create linkage and coordination with the other sub-components, namely, Social Accountability (SA) and Grievance Redress Mechanism  (GRM).  In  this  regard,  the  assessment  shows  encouraging  results.  The  great majority  of  woredas  (82%)  reported  the  engagement  of  the  initiative  with  the  other  subcomponents, and substantial improvement is seen as compared to the situation in 2017. The major areas of linkage and coordination reported are joint monitoring of FTA implementation,  engagement  in  pre-budget  planning,  facilitation  of  information  flow  to citizens,  and  consolidation  of  information  about  citizens'  priorities  during  the  pre-budget planning  phase.  With  the  exception  of  facilitation  of  information  flow  to  citizens,  higher proportions of woredas witnessed the existence of coordination in the rest of the stated areas.

However, the extent of linkage is moderate in the majority of the woredas (54%) and it is only half of the woredas that the status of linkages and coordination were jointly assessed.

Project management: The parent program of the FTA initiative has a well-thought-out log framework and results matrix. However, the assessment did not find a log framework with a clear theory of change specifically for the FTA initiative. This creates confusion during M &amp;E s as there is a tendency to confuse the FTA activities, output, outcomes, and the parent project  activities,  output,  and  outcome.  To  address  this,  the  assessment  developed  a  log framework  superficially  for  FTA.  With  regards  to  implementing  the  findings  of  previous evaluations,  the  current  assessment  documents  some  clear  improvement.  For  instance,  the 2016  assessment  concluded  that  more  BLT  training  was  required,  and  this  assessment discovered  that  the  number  of  persons  receiving  BLT  is  rising,  indicating  that  the  prior evaluations' suggestions are being implemented. The findings of the current assessment also identified challenges that were identified by the previous assessment indicating that actions taken  did  not  do  much  to  ameliorate  some  of  the  challenges.  For  instance,  access  to procurement and audit reports as  well  as  limited  coordination  were  identified  by  the  2016 assessment as a point of intervention. Even though there are some efforts made to address these issues, they still continue to be a challenge.

Lesson learned: The assessment identifies the following key lessons: i) Putting more women in leadership positions improves transparency, ii) Having dedicated staff facilitates implementation of FTA, iii)Transparency and accountability benefit both the citizens and the government, iv) Continuous engagement of both those in power and the community is key to sustaining  a  commitment  to  transparency  and  accountability  and  v)  Not  taking  swift  and timely corrective action has a major disincentive effect on both government officials and the community.

## CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS

Overall, the assessment revealed a mixed result. Encouraging results emerge if one looks at the progress since 2009

-  Understanding of the budget process is increasing
-  Engagement in the local government is increasing
-  More and more peoples feel that their voice is being heard
-  Overall satisfaction in basic service delivery is increasing

-  Overall satisfaction with the quality of life is increasing

These improvements can be attributed to the huge investment and efforts made by the parent programs, namely, PBSs and ESPES programs.

In  recent  years,  however,  citizen  engagement-compared with the 2016 situations­-citizens' engagement and participation in local government are declining. Similarly, satisfaction with service  delivery  and  quality  of  life  also  decreased.  The  main  reasons  include  political instability, conflict, and the COVID-19 pandemic.

The following recommendations are expected to improve the implementation status of FTA.

-  Provision  of  budgetary  information: Continue  the  effort  of  improving  access  to information; expand the practice of inviting community members to review meetings; enhance communities' awareness on using budgetary information so as to make their local  government  transparent  and  accountable;  and  provision  of  information  on  the procurement  process  and  audit  findings  should  be  put  in  place  at  the  federal institutions.
-  Awareness creation and training: Continue the effort of creating awareness about the FTA initiative; focus on increasing the awareness of the community about their rights; and train the community and CSOs on information usage.
-  Improve the utilization of M&amp;E information: Provide capacity-building training in the  M&amp;E system; prepare specific and achievable action plans from M&amp;E findings and  communicate  these  to  relevant  government  offices;  establish  regular  follow-up mechanisms  to  ensure  that  action  plans  and  recommendations  suggested  by  the assessment reports are implemented; actively engage the community and CSOs in the M&amp;E process and allocate a reasonable budget for M&amp;E.
-  Take timely corrective actions when rules and procedures are not followed: Develop the tradition of taking corrective actions in a timely manner; create awareness about the consequence of not discharging duties and responsibility; empower the community to recall their representatives if they  fail to  take  corrective  actions;  and create a hotline for the community to voice their opinion anonymously.

-  Encourage  women's  participation: Enhance  women's  participation  in  accessing budget  information,  budget  process  awareness,  pre-budget  discussions,  and  BLT training.
-  More  resources  to  regain  the  ground  you've  lost  due  to  COVID-19  and  other shocks: The  impact  of  the  pandemic  on  the  economy  is  significant.  It  has  also  a potential  to  derail  the  progress  made  over  the  years  with  regard  to  increasing  the accountability  and  transparency  of  the  local  government.  Thus,  more  resource  is needed to attenuate the impact of the pandemic and the other shocks and recover lost ground.

## 1. Introduction

## 1.1. Background

Transparency and accountability initiatives have emerged over the past decade as a key for improving public service delivery. The initiatives have been also seen as one of the major strategies  to  address  both  developmental  failures  and  democratic  deficits.  Nevertheless, service delivery is perhaps the field in which transparency and accountability initiatives have been longest applied (Gaventa &amp; McGee, 2013). The initiatives endeavor to enhance service delivery by establishing accountability and transparency from the suppliers' side, at least to enhance effectiveness in responding to the needs and voices of the people that they serve, while enhancing participation and empowerment of people in the services they get from the service providers.

Transparency,  accountability,  and  citizen  empowerment  had  long  been  a  challenge  in Ethiopia. Thus, to empower citizens as well as enhance public sector efficiency, effectiveness,  transparency,  and  accountability,  the  Government  of  Ethiopia  (GoE)  began implementing  major  reform  programs  in  the  early  1990s  by  establishing  necessary  legal frameworks  to  manage  public  resources  efficiently  and  effectively.  The  legal  frameworks emanate from the  Constitution 1 and  the  Constitution  provides  for  people's  participation  in decentralized  government  through  "direct  participation  in  the  administration  of  their  local units" (Article 50:4). The Article further states that -State governments shall be established at state  and  other  administrative  levels  that  they  find  necessary  and  adequate  power  shall  be granted to the lowest units of government to enable the people to participate directly in the administration of such units‖. Article 43:2 of the Constitution also explains that citizens have the right to participate in national development and, in particular, to be consulted with respect to policies and projects affecting their community. Furthermore, Article 29 of the Constitution  stipulates  the  -right  of  freedom  to  seek,  receive  and  impart  information  and ideas of all kinds, regardless of frontiers, either orally, in writing, or print, in the form of art or through any media of his choice‖.

This reflects entry points for citizens' participation in the government system and services and access to related information. In line with this, power has been devolved to the lowest unit of government (Woredas and Kebeles) to enable people to participate directly in the

1 Constitution of The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, 2014

administration  of  such  units.  As  regards  transparency  and  accountability,  the  Constitution clearly  stipulates  in  Article  12:1  that  -the  conduct  of  affairs  of  government  shall  be transparent‖. Further, sub-Article 2 states that any public official or an elected representative is accountable for any failure in official duties.

These articles provide a legal basis for transparency, accountability, and citizen participation; and public financial governance in the country is rooted in the Constitution and anchored on a legal and regulatory framework comprising an extensive body of laws, rules, regulations, and international standards adapted to local conditions. Entrenched in this legal framework, the country  has  embarked  on  a  comprehensive  program  of  Public  Financial  Management Reforms  since  the  mid-1990s  to  improve  efficiency  and  effectiveness  in  public  spending while enhancing transparency and accountability in managing public finances. The government's  effort  has  been  guided  by  the  principles  of  good  governance;  citizen's participation  in  their  development,  the  responsiveness  of  public  services  to  citizen's  needs and interests,  transparency  of  public  decision-making,  accountability  of  decision-makers  in government to the public for their decisions and actions, and efficient and effective delivery of public services.

Protection of Basic Services program has been under implementation in Ethiopia since 2006 with the aims of expanding citizens' access to basic services, particularly in education, health, water  supply,  sanitation,  agriculture,  and  rural  roads  and  improving  the  quality  of  these services.  Since  its  inception,  the  program  has  helped  to  strengthen  decentralized  public service delivery to the poor and supported efforts that aimed at improving opportunities for citizens to provide feedback on service delivery to local administrators and service providers.

The program, funded by the Government of Ethiopia (GoE) and a number of development partners, has been the principal instrument for transferring development financing to Ethiopia in support of the country's progress towards the improvement of basic service delivery at the local  level.  Protection  of  Basic  Services  (PBS)  was  implemented  in  three  phases;  PBS  I (2005-2008),  PBS  II  (2009-2012),  and  PBS  III  (2012-2018).  In  PBS  Phase  I  &amp;  II,  the program implementation supported the citizens' access  to  information  and  engagements  in the provision of local basic service delivery. In Phase III, Development Partners (DPs) and the  GoE  targeted  to  expand,  deepen  and  institutionalize  the  citizens'  engagement  in  the service delivery system.

The  PBS  program  was  extended  through  successive  programs,  namely,  Enhancing  Shared Prosperity  through  Equitable  Services  (ESPES)  program  and  its  Additional  Financing (ESPES-AF).  ESPES  is  devised  as  a  new  framework  for  engaging  in  decentralized  basic services in the country by replacing the basic service block grant portion of the PBS and has been  operational  since  2015.  Building  on  almost  10  years  of  support  for  basic  services delivery,  the  ESPES  focused  on  leveraging  the  government's  broad  program  of  service delivery support to promote equity, enhance capacity, and institutionalize critical systems for service  delivery,  especially  at  the  woreda  level.  These  successive  programs  also  aimed  to strengthen accountability systems at the decentralized levels by supporting capacity developments in public finance management and the implementation of citizen engagement initiatives.

Similar  to  the  PBS,  ESPES  programs  have  Citizen  Engagement  sub-components,  namely, Financial Transparency and Accountability (FTA), Social Accountability (SA), and Grievance  Redress  Mechanism  (GRM).  The  objective  of  FTA  has  been  to  improve transparency and accountability around public budget processes (budget preparation, allocation, execution, and audits) at the Federal, Regional/City Administration, and Woreda Administration  levels  by  developing  various  tools  and  pre-budget  discussion  guidelines. Efforts  have  been  underway  to  create  FTA  and  Social  Accountability  linkages  and  to investigate  the  possible  linkage  of  the  three  elements  of  the  Citizen  Engagement  Initiative (FTA/SA/GRM).

Starting in 2017, the Government of Ethiopia also introduced the Financial Transparency and Accountability concept to the regional and federal level institutions and issued a directive to implement FTA at the federal and regional levels to mainstream the initiative in all public institutions.  Accordingly,  significant  achievements  have  been  registered  in  the  area  of boosting  citizens'  understanding  of  the  Government  budget  process,  accessibility  of  public budget information, and citizens' participation on local government budgeting, planning, and implementation.

As part of the monitoring  and supervision of the implementation of the FTA initiative, an independent and systematic assessment of the effectiveness and impact of the FTA initiative in Ethiopia has been conducted 2 .

## 1.2. Objective of the assessment

The  overall  objective  of  the  assessment  is  to  carry  out  an  independent  and  systematic assessment of the effectiveness and impact of the FTA initiative in Ethiopia by comparing the current  implementation  status  with  baseline  and  previous  performance  survey  data  and studies  and  to  draw  lessons  from  experience  and  provide  guidance  to  the  future  strategic direction that would help deepen the initiative in government institutions.

## Specific objectives:

-  To review the implementation progress of the FTA initiative at federal and sub-national level.
-  To  review  the  extent  of  citizens'  understanding  of  the  public  budget  processes  and engagement in the budget processes via direct participation and different representative modalities.
-  To  assess  the  effectiveness  of  FTA  implementation  means  (tools)  that  had  been designed to improve citizens' awareness on public budget processes, guarantees citizens overall budget information requirements, and enhance citizens' participation on government  planning  and  implementation  to  strengthen  accountability  system,  and suggest  sustainable  and  cost  effective  way  of  information  disclosure  based  on  past national and international best practices.
-  To identify social and cultural constraints, opportunities, and entry points for reducing gender  inequalities  and  promoting  more  equal  relations  between  women  and  men related to FTA initiative.
-  To identify factors that have contributed to achieving or hindering achievement of the intended  outputs  while  implementing  the  initiative  at  federal,  regional  and  woreda levels, including urban administrations.
-  To assess the extent to which the accountability part of the initiative, i.e., procurement and audit information disclosure have been effective and contributed to efficient use of public finances.

2 The  assessment  is  contracted  out  to  a  consultancy  firm  called  TAK-Innovative  Research  and Development Institute (TAK-IRDI).