implement FTA initiatives. Relevant gender-disaggregated data (participants in BLT training and pre-budget discussion) is also collected and reported at a national level.

However, the experience of assessing the performance of basic services and monitoring FTA implementation in light of gender-segregated data is reported in less than half of the visited woredas. Unless relevant use and analysis of the collected gender-based data is conducted, collecting and documenting gender-disaggregated data alone might not suffice to assess the FTA initiative in light of gender mainstreaming.

Figure 65: Availability and use of sex disaggregated data with regards to  FTA implementation

<!-- image -->

## 6.3. Women participation in FTA implementation

The ultimate aim of the local government in ensuring gender equality is to encourage both men and women to participate in their local government equally. In this regard, we assessed the extent of women's  participation and  the  impact  of  FTA  initiatives  on  women's engagement level.  Although the participation  of  both  women  and  men  is  low  in  accessing budget information, budget process and participation in pre-budget discussion, the proportion of  women's  participation  is  quite  low  as  compared  to  their  counterparts  males.  The proportion of women who are aware of the budget process is 27 percentage points lower than their male counterparts (51% as compared with 78%). Similarly, only half (50%) of women reported  that  they  accessed  budget  information  during  last  year,  which  is  lower  than  the proportion  of  males  that  accessed  information  in  the  same  period  (67%).  Participation  of women in pre-budget discussion is 17 percentage point less than that of male (44% compared to 61%). The same is true for when it comes to engagement in BLT trainings.

Figure 66: Participation in local government FTA initiative

<!-- image -->

The existence of a favorable environment for equal participation in the local government is expected  to  empower  women,  increase  their  participation,  and  make  women  community members feel that they are heard. The majority of the focus group participants did not detect any  change  with  respect  to  taking  into  account  women's  needs  and  priority  by  local government (67%). Similarly, a significant majority (71%) of the participants reported that there  is  no  significant  change  in  women's  participation.  However,  only  less  than  10%  of discussion participants feel that the condition of women is worsening. Given the COVID-19 pandemics, political reform, war, and instability in the country, the results are encouraging. In line  with  this,  focus  group  participants  mentioned  that  there  are  now  more  initiatives  and projects  that  specially  address  the  needs  of  women.  Some  of  these  projects  work  on improving access to water which is the primary responsibility of women in the households. Other projects support women to engage in alternative income generating activities.

Figure 67: Change in women participation over the last 5 years

<!-- image -->

Overall, in terms  of putting in place a  favorable  environment  to  increase  women's participation  in  the  local  government,  there  is  a  lot  of  room  for  improvement.  Though  the national-wide  political  reform  initiated  about  four  years  ago  was  successful  in  increasing women's participation at higher government levels, women remain under-represented in local governments.

## 6.4. Challenges in ensuring gender equality

A number of  challenges  have  been  identified  during  the  discussions  with  the  community. With regards to women in a leadership position, despite their strong convictions about gender equality  in  leadership,  the  community  is  aware  of  the  forces  that  hold  women  back. Discussion with focus group participants indicated that eight in ten (72%) say that traditions of,  and  expectations  for,  male  to  be  in  government  leadership  position  contributes  at  least somewhat to  women's  lack  of  representation  in  top  positions-including  61%,  who  say  it contributes  highly.  Other  preconceptions  also  play  a  role,  including  women  being  seen  as mainly  responsible  for  their  family  welling  and  childcare  over  overking  outside  the  home (73%), and the perception that women are less effective leaders than men (78%). In addition to  these  preconceptions  about  women  and  leadership,  discussion  participants  see  other concrete barriers as contributing to the dearth of women leaders, including lack of support from  their  spouses  (52%),  lack  of  role  women  role  models  (47%)  as  well  as  lack  of confidence among  women  to  voice their opinion more  forcefully  (67%).  Women's expectations  for  the  future  suggest  the  power  of  these  forces:  While  35%  of  men  see

themselves as having opportunities to hold a leadership position in the local government, just 11% of women feel the same way. The community also acknowledges the impact of these obstacles-71% agree that it is easier for men to reach top leadership positions than equally qualified  women.  Other  challenges  identified  by  the  community  include  lower  educational achievements  of  women,  lack  of  awareness  and  attitude  about  the  importance  of  ensuring gender equity, existing social norms that discourage women not to have a more active role outside of their homes and absences of strong local organizations (such as women group) that actively work for women's empowerment.

## 7. Linkage and coordination

In  order  to  reduce  inconsistency  and  inefficiency  among  programs  that  have  citizen engagement  sub-components,  there  are  efforts  to  create  linkage  and  coordination  between FTA and Social Accountability (SA) as well as the overall Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM). The creation of linkage and coordination is expected to lead to the responsiveness of local  government  to  the  priority  of  citizens.  In  addition,  creating  linkage  among  these programs  is  expected  to  facilitate  the  institutionalization  of  SA,  FTA,  and  GRM  into  the existing government structure.

Specific  activities  that  are  expected  to  strengthen  the  linkage  are;  facilitating  relevant information  flow  from  government  to  citizens,  consolidating  priorities  identified  through these programs and engaging/participating in pre-budget planning and citizen budget forum. The  existence  of  a  clear  line  of  communication  and  whether  there  is  collaboration  in monitoring the implementation status is also expected to affect the linkage. To that end, the extent to which citizen engagement components of FTA, SA &amp; GRM are coordinated/ linked is assessed in terms of the above expectations, and the results are presented below.

Information collected from key informants reveals that in 82% of the sampled districts, FTA works with the citizen engagement sub-components of other programs and initiatives. This is an  improvement  from  the  situation  in  2017  when  only  70%  reported  that  there  was  such linkage.  The  major  areas  of  cooperation  are  the  facilitation  of  information  flow  to  citizens and the consolidation of information about citizens' priorities during the pre-budget planning phase. Forty-two percent of the visited woredas reported that they work together with SA to provide relevant budgetary information to the citizens, and 67% reported that these programs and initiatives inform each other about citizens' priorities identified through their respective programs and consolidate that information. Participation in budget planning is also identified as an area of collaboration.

To facilitate these linkages and collaboration, a clear line of communication is needed. In this regard, in about 68% of woredas there is a clear line of communication and formal reporting mechanism.  In  the  remaining  areas,  the  communication  is  either  informal  or  very  limited. Conducting joint monitoring (70%) is also reported to be the other area where FTA works in collaboration with SA and to some extent with the GRM system. The lowest coordination is

observed  in  the  area  of  facilitation  of  information  flow  to  citizens,  where  only  42%  of woredas reported doing so.

Figure  68:  The  extent  of  linkage  and  coordination  between  FTA  and  other  initiatives  with citizen engagement sub-components

<!-- image -->

It  is  reported  that  in  half  of  the  visited  local  governments,  the  status  of  the  linkages  and coordination were jointly assessed. The percentage during 2017 is about 52% which is only slightly higher than the current findings. The results of the monitoring  assessment revealed that the extent of linkage is moderate in the majority of the cases (54%) while it is found to be weak in 12% of the visited woredas.

Figure 69: Whether the extent of the linkages is assessed and its results.

<!-- image -->

Strong  and  effective  linkage  with  other  programs  and  government  existing  systems  is expected  to  reduce  inefficiencies,  contribute  towards  institutionalizing  transparency  and accountability, and is a key to ensuring the sustainability of the positive achievements.

Households  were  asked  to  assess  the  ease  of  logging  grievances  and  speed  of  resolution. Encouragingly, in majorly of the case, the grievance handling system has either not changed or improved over the past 5 years. Improvement in linkage and coordination over the last 5 years partially explains the positive results.

Figure 70: Community's assessment of the grievance handling system over the past 5 years

<!-- image -->

FGD  participants  in  Afar  region  reported  that  Civil  society  organizations  and  selected members  of  the  community  collect  weak  services  from  the  community  related  to  basic services  such  as  education,  water,  health  and  other  issues  and  then  first  try  to  resolve  the issues  in  consultation  with  the  relevant  sector  officials.  If  the  issues  do  not  resolve  with sectoral offices, the complaint will be heard in the woreda level grievance body. The Woreda Complaints Hearing Committee will then reviews and respond to the grievances. Finally, the selected community members inform the results of complaints through local level meetings.

FGD participants  in  the  Afar  region  reported  that  Civil  society  organizations  and  selected members  in  the  community  collect  weak  services  from  the  community  related  to  basic services  such  as  education,  water,  health,  and  other  issues  and  then  first  try  to  resolve  the issues in consultation with the relevant sector officials. If the issues raised by the community

do not resolve within sectoral offices, complains will be heard in the woreda level grievance body.  The  Woreda  Complaints  Hearing  Committee  will  then  reviews  and  respond  to  the grievances.  Finally,  the  selected  community  members  inform  the  results  of  complaints through local level meetings.

On the other hand, some focus group discussants in Amhara and Dire  Dawa reported that there is a lack of coordination among FTA, SA, and GRM. Not only that, since there is no formal  structure  either  through  FTA  or  SA  they  were  not  able  to  file  their  complaint.  For instance,  the  discussant  in  Gebezemaryam  kebele  in  Quarit  woreda  or  Amhara  region bitterly complained that it is difficult to get a resolution for their grievances as a result they are  suffering  from  a  lack  of  good  governance.  Similarly,  in  Dire  Dawa  city,  focus  group participants  reported  sometimes  they  feel  that  their  voice  seems  to  fall  on  deaf  ears.  This discourages citizen participation in decision-making and development activities of their local governments.

A cohesive cross-program approach for instituting social accountability is essential to create a more  transparent  government  and  to  encourage  citizen  participation.  Having  an  effective coordination mechanism also has a greater impact in responding to complaints than projects and  programs  that  have  civil  engagement  components  working  in  isolation.  However,  the following  are  identified  as  the  main  challenges  that  hinder  effective  coordination  among different  programs  and  government  offices.  Lack  of  awareness  about  the  complementary nature  of  FTA,  SA  and  GRM  challenges  is  one  of  the  key  challenges.  There  is  also  a tendency to underestimate the benefit of having a strong linkage between these initiatives as a result  there  is  limited  commitment and there is a tendency to view working with others as additional work rather than viewing it as an effort to increase the effectiveness of the social accountability at a broader scale. In addition, absences of regular and continuous follow-up and not having dedicated staff responsible to coordinate the three initiatives with clear duties and responsibilities have also been mentioned as among the challenged faced. We recognize that it is not feasible and advisable to hire new focal staff for every new initiative. However, particularly during the initial phase, having capable staff to coordinate the activities of these programs and then slowly institutionalizing the practice would go a long way in solving the coordination problem.

## 8. Project management

Putting in place effective monitoring and evaluation (M&amp;E) mechanism is a key for sound governance. It is also necessary to the achievement of evidence-based policy making, budget decisions, management, and accountability. The parent program of FTA, namely, Enhancing Shared Prosperity through Equitable Services (ESPES) program put in places a robust M &amp; E mechanism with indicators and an M&amp;E plan 38 . The results framework has specific indicators for citizen engagement components, which can be used to monitor the progress. However, the theory  of  change  in  the  log  framework  for  the  FTA  initiative,  specifically,  is  not  clearly articulated. As a result, there is confusion with regards to FTA activities, output, outcomes, and the parent project activities, output, and outcome. Since the parent program has a well throughout log framework with clear indicators, there is a tendency to consider the output and outcome of the ESPES program with that of the expected activities, output, and outcome of FTA. In this assessment, we tried to prepare a log framework for the FTA, which is distinct from the ESPES log framework but contributes toward achieving the Program Development Objectives (PDOs) of the parent program, which is '… to improve equitable access to basic services and strengthen accountability systems at the decentralized level'.

Regions/city administrations and woredas are expected to contribute towards archiving the targets  set  out  in  the  result  framework.  On  this  point,  it  would  be  instrumental  to  have  a specific M&amp;E plan that is aligned with the role and responsibility of these different levels of government  structure.  In  this  regard,  the  assessment  revealed  that  in  all  regions  and  city administrations and visited woredas, there is an M&amp;E plan specially designed to follow up on the implementation status of the FTA initiative in their respective areas. Discussion with key informants  at  both  regional  and  woreda  levels  revealed  that  M&amp;E  is  conducted  regularly either quarterly or semi-annually.

One of the keys goals of M&amp;E is to identify gaps as they arise and make timely amendments to achieve the desired results. The implication is that apart from identifying gaps, M&amp;E also provides inputs and priority areas that need to be improved or amended to achieve the project goal. In light of this, both at regional/city administration and woreda levels, those who are responsible  for  the  implementation  of  FTA  were  asked  to  what  extent  they  incorporated recommendations and suggestions made by previous assessments.

The results indicate that some recommendations seem to be implemented. For instance, the 2016 assessment identified a need to expand the BLT training. This assessment showed that more and more citizens are being training on BLT. Similarly, creating more opportunities for the citizens to voice their opinions and incorporate those inputs into the budget process was one of the recommendations in the 2016 assessment. In this regard, meaningful improvement has been observed as more and more peoples feel that their ideas and opinions have impact on their local governments' decisions.

However,  there  are  also  a  number  of  issues  that  have  been  identified  in  the  previous assessment  and  continue  to  be  challenging.  For  instance,  gender  inequality  has  been identified in the previous evaluation and one of the recommendations calls for '…strengthening  information  dissemination  mechanisms  which  can  ensure  that  both female and rural residents can access the information equally'. Unequal access to budgetary information  and  participation in local governances  are  still identified in the current assessment  indicating  the  challenging  nature  of  resolving  social,  cultural,  and  institutional factors  that  hinder  equal  participation.  Likewise,  the  2016  assessment  suggested  that '… more work is needed on budget and service-related information dissemination to citizens'. In the  current  assessment,  access  to  information,  particularly  procurement  reports  and  audit findings are still limited. The need to strengthen the accountability mechanism and improve coordination  with  another  program  with  citizen  engagement  has  also  been  raised  by  the previous  assessment.  In  the  current  assessment,  both  issues  have  been  raised  as  the  key challenges  of  implementing  the  FTA  initiatives.  Overall,  implementing  and  applying  the findings and recommendations of the previous evaluations and assessments are found to be mixed.

Lack of awareness and limited regular follow-up explains why the findings and recommendations  of  the  previous  monitoring  and  evaluation  were  not  implemented.  The other  challenges  in  applying  the  findings  of  the  previous  evaluations  are  that  some  of  the recommendations are too general to be useful for regions/city  administrative  and  woredas. For instance, in 2016, one of the recommendations was to reads as -… emphasis should be given to areas that can bring positive changes on the lives of the citizens across the regions with special emphasis to regions with a lower level of satisfaction'. This is too general to be useful for woreda-level officials to act upon. In another instance, the recommendation goes beyond  the  scope  of  FTA  initiatives  and  falls  into  the  scope  of  the  parent  program